.TH COMMIT_GH 1 "July 2026" "commit_gh 2.5.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
commit_gh \- secure git commits, releases, and repository hardening
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B commit_gh
[\fIFLAGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBcommit_gh\fR is a Bash CLI that wraps \fBgit\fR(1) and \fBgh\fR(1) to enforce a
secure, opinionated commit and release workflow.
.PP
It addresses three concerns: repository scaffolding and security hardening,
staged-file secret scanning before every commit, and automated semantic
versioning with GitHub release creation.
.PP
All write operations are idempotent \(em safe to re-run against any repository
at any stage of its lifecycle.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Setup
.TP
.B \-\-init\-repo
Initialize a git repository in the current directory if one does not already
exist. Runs the full security scaffold automatically (equivalent to
\fB\-\-harden\fR). Creates an initial commit so that \fBgh repo create \-\-push\fR
has commits to push.
.TP
.B \-\-init\-remote
Create an \fIorigin\fR remote via the GitHub CLI if none exists. Requires
\fBgh\fR to be installed and authenticated (\fBgh auth login\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-public
Make the remote repository public when used with \fB\-\-init\-remote\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-private
Make the remote repository private when used with \fB\-\-init\-remote\fR.
This is the default.
.SS Security
.TP
.B \-\-harden
Install missing security guardrails in the current repository. Idempotent:
any file that already exists is left untouched.
.PP
.RS
Creates or updates:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.gitignore\fR \(em secrets, OS artefacts, editor files, build output,
\fI*.jsonl\fR, \fIinput/\fR and \fIoutput/\fR directories
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.env.example\fR \(em credential template (commit this, never \fI.env\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.gitleaks.toml\fR \(em Gitleaks config extending the default ruleset
with an allowlist for \fICHANGELOG.md\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.git/hooks/pre\-commit\fR \(em blocks sensitive filenames and runs
Gitleaks on staged files before every commit
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/workflows/gitleaks.yml\fR \(em CI secret scan with SHA-pinned
action, \fBpermissions: read-all\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/workflows/release.yml\fR \(em automated GitHub release on tag push
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/dependabot.yml\fR \(em weekly GitHub Actions dependency updates
.IP \(bu 2
\fICHANGELOG.md\fR, \fILICENSE\fR (MIT), \fIREADME.md\fR, \fICONTRIBUTING.md\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md\fR and \fIfeature_request.md\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/pull_request_template.md\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.github/CODEOWNERS\fR (owner from \fBgh api user\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
\fI.editorconfig\fR, \fIdocs/release\-checklist.md\fR
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-audit
Check which guardrails are present and report any that are missing.
Exits 0 if every check passes, exits 1 if any check fails.
Run after \fB\-\-harden\fR to confirm the result:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-harden \-\-audit
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-scan
Run Gitleaks against the full working tree and exit. Requires
\fBgitleaks\fR to be installed.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-scan
Skip the automatic Gitleaks staged-file scan that runs before every commit.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-hook
Skip pre\-commit hook installation when \fB\-\-init\-repo\fR or \fB\-\-harden\fR runs.
.TP
.B \-\-secret\-scanning
Enable GitHub Secret Scanning and push protection on the remote repository
via the GitHub API (\fBPATCH /repos/{slug}\fR). Also enables Dependabot
vulnerability alerts (\fBPUT /repos/{slug}/vulnerability\-alerts\fR).
Requires admin access to the repository.
.SS Release
.TP
.BR \-\-release " " \fIpatch\fR|\fIminor\fR|\fImajor\fR|\fIx.y.z\fR
Bump the \fIVERSION\fR file, commit, create an annotated tag, push branch
and tag, and create a GitHub release. The bump type may be \fIpatch\fR,
\fIminor\fR, \fImajor\fR, or an explicit version such as \fI2.1.0\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite an existing tag and GitHub release when used with \fB\-\-release\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-release
Tag and push only; skip GitHub release creation.
.TP
.B \-\-generate\-notes
Auto\-generate GitHub release notes from merged pull requests instead of
using the default static \fIRelease vX.Y.Z\fR message.
.TP
.B \-\-read\-version\-only
Print the \fIVERSION\fR file, the script\(aqs internal \fBVERSION=\fR constant,
and the latest git tag, then exit. Useful to confirm sources are aligned
before releasing.
.TP
.BR \-\-version\-file " " \fIpath\fR
Path to the version file updated by \fB\-\-release\fR. Default: \fIVERSION\fR.
.SS Commit
.TP
.BR \-\-branch " " \fIname\fR
Branch to use for commit and push. Default: the current branch, falling
back to \fImain\fR if HEAD has no commits yet.
.TP
.BR \-\-message " " \fI"text"\fR
Override the auto\-generated commit message.
Default: \fIDD/MM/YYYY \- Updated configuration and fixed bugs\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print every action that would be taken without modifying any files or
running any git commands.
.TP
.BR \-\-quiet ", " \-q
Suppress informational output. Error messages are always printed.
.TP
.BR \-\-tree " [" \fItrue\fR | \fIfalse\fR ]
Regenerate the folder tree using \fBfolder_tree\fR(1) before committing.
The optional argument defaults to \fItrue\fR when omitted.
.SS Utilities
.TP
.BR \-\-rollback " [" \fItag\fR ]
Delete a GitHub release and its associated git tag (locally and on origin).
If \fItag\fR is omitted, the latest semver tag is used.
When the release commit (\fIchore: release vX.Y.Z\fR) is the current HEAD,
a revert commit is created automatically so the VERSION file is restored.
Idempotent: safe to run when the release or remote tag is already gone.
.TP
.B \-\-sign
Configure GPG or SSH commit signing globally.
Detects the first available secret key (GPG preferred, SSH fallback),
sets \fIcommit.gpgsign=true\fR and \fIuser.signingkey\fR in global git config,
and writes \fI.github/workflows/signed-commits.yml\fR to the current repository
so CI rejects unsigned commits on \fImain\fR.
Run \fBgpg \-\-gen\-key\fR or \fBssh\-keygen \-t ed25519\fR first if no key exists.
.TP
.B \-\-labels
Create (or update) the standard set of GitHub issue labels on the remote
repository via the GitHub CLI.
Idempotent: existing labels are updated with the canonical colour and description.
Requires admin access to the repository.
.TP
.BR \-\-changelog " [" \fIpatch\fR|\fIminor\fR|\fImajor\fR|\fIx.y.z\fR ]
Preview what the next CHANGELOG entry would look like without writing anything.
Reads \fBgit log\fR since the last tag and maps conventional commit prefixes
to sections (Added, Fixed, Changed, Security) exactly as \fB\-\-release\fR would.
The bump type defaults to \fIpatch\fR when omitted.
No files are modified.
.TP
.BR \-\-milestone " [" \fIpatch\fR|\fIminor\fR|\fImajor\fR|\fIx.y.z\fR ]
Create a GitHub milestone for the next version via the GitHub API.
Computes the target version from the \fIVERSION\fR file using the supplied
bump type (default: \fIpatch\fR), or accepts an explicit version such as \fI2.1.0\fR.
If the milestone already exists, its URL is printed without error.
Requires admin access to the repository.
.TP
.B \-\-contributors
Generate or overwrite \fICONTRIBUTORS.md\fR from \fBgit shortlog\fR output.
Contributors are listed in descending commit-count order.
The file is regenerated on every run so it stays current as history grows.
.TP
.BR \-\-bump " " \fIpatch\fR|\fIminor\fR|\fImajor\fR
Create a new annotated git tag by incrementing the latest existing tag.
Does not modify any files (use \fB\-\-release\fR for full release automation).
.TP
.B \-\-preview
Preview the next tag that \fB\-\-bump\fR would create without creating it.
.TP
.B \-\-verify
Run verification checks: clean working tree, correct branch, and alignment
between the \fI.version\fR file and the latest git tag.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show a help summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the script version and exit.
.SH SECURITY MODEL
\fBcommit_gh\fR implements a three-layer defence against secret leakage:
.PP
.B "Layer 1 \(em Filename blocking (pre-commit hook)"
.RS
Matches staged filenames against a pattern covering \fI.env\fR, \fI*.pem\fR,
\fI*.key\fR, SSH private keys (\fIid_rsa\fR, \fIid_ed25519\fR, etc.), and Vault
config files (\fI.vault.*\fR). Blocks the commit before Git creates it.
.RE
.PP
.B "Layer 2 \(em Content scanning (Gitleaks)"
.RS
Scans staged file \fIcontents\fR using Gitleaks. Catches secrets embedded
inside files whose names appear innocent (Terraform vars, JSON configs,
YAML documents, source code). False positives are suppressed via
\fI.gitleaks.toml\fR stopwords or path allowlists.
.RE
.PP
.B "Layer 3 \(em GitHub Secret Scanning"
.RS
Server-side scanning on every push. Catches secrets that bypass local
tooling (commits made with \fB\-\-no\-verify\fR, contributors without the
hook, pushes from other machines). Enabled via \fB\-\-secret\-scanning\fR.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Full setup for a new repository:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-init\-repo \-\-init\-remote \-\-public \-\-secret\-scanning
.fi
.RE
.PP
Secure and verify an existing repository in one pass:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-harden \-\-audit
.fi
.RE
.PP
Everyday commit and push (no arguments needed):
.RS
.nf
commit_gh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Commit with a specific message:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-message "feat: add OAuth login"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Release a patch version:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-release patch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Release a specific version with auto\-generated notes:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-release 2.1.0 \-\-generate\-notes
.fi
.RE
.PP
Overwrite an existing tag and release:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-release patch \-\-force
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview what a minor release would do without making changes:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-release minor \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.PP
Scan the full working tree for secrets:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-scan
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check version alignment before releasing:
.RS
.nf
commit_gh \-\-read\-version\-only
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. For \fB\-\-audit\fR: all guardrails are in place.
.TP
.B 1
Error or missing guardrails. For \fB\-\-audit\fR: one or more checks failed.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B bash(1)
Version 4.0 or later. The macOS system bash is version 3; install a
current version with \fBbrew install bash\fR.
.TP
.B git(1)
Required for all operations.
.TP
.B gh(1)
GitHub CLI. Required for \fB\-\-init\-remote\fR, GitHub release creation
(\fB\-\-release\fR), and \fB\-\-secret\-scanning\fR. Install: \fBbrew install gh\fR.
Authenticate: \fBgh auth login\fR.
.TP
.B gitleaks(1)
Required for \fB\-\-scan\fR and for content scanning in the pre\-commit hook.
Install: \fBbrew install gitleaks\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .gitignore
Written by \fB\-\-harden\fR. Strong defaults for secrets, OS artefacts, editor
files, build output, and data directories.
.TP
.I .gitleaks.toml
Written by \fB\-\-harden\fR. Extends the Gitleaks default ruleset with a
project\-level allowlist.
.TP
.I .git/hooks/pre\-commit
Installed by \fB\-\-harden\fR. Runs before every \fBgit commit\fR. Blocks sensitive
filenames and scans staged content with Gitleaks.
.TP
.I .github/workflows/gitleaks.yml
Written by \fB\-\-harden\fR. Runs Gitleaks in CI on push and pull request events.
.TP
.I VERSION
The authoritative version file. Read and updated by \fB\-\-release\fR.
.SH AUTHORS
Raymon Epping <repping@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR gh (1),
.BR gitleaks (1),
.BR bash (1)
.PP
Source and issues: https://github.com/raymonepping/homebrew-commit-gh-cli
